Chapter 1. Philosophy
Chapter 1. Philosophy
Prev Part I. Context
Next
Chapter 1. Philosophy
Philosophy Matters
Table of ContentsCulture? What Culture?The Durability of UnixThe Case against Learning Unix CultureWhat Unix Gets WrongWhat Unix Gets RightOpen-Source SoftwareCross-Platform Portability and Open StandardsThe Internet and the World Wide WebThe Open-Source CommunityFlexibility All the Way DownUnix Is Fun to HackThe Lessons of Unix Can Be Applied ElsewhereBasics of the Unix PhilosophyRule of Modularity: Write simple parts connected by clean interfaces.Rule of Clarity: Clarity is better than cleverness.Rule of Composition: Design programs to be connected with other programs.Rule of Separation: Separate policy from mechanism;
separate interfaces from engines.Rule of Simplicity: Design for simplicity; add complexity only where you must.Rule of Parsimony: Write a big program only when it is
clear by demonstration that nothing else will do.Rule of Transparency: Design for visibility to make
inspection and debugging easier.Rule of Robustness: Robustness is the child of transparency and simplicity.Rule of Representation: Fold knowledge into data,
so program logic can be stupid and robust.Rule of Least Surprise: In interface design, always do
the least surprising thing.Rule of Silence: When a program has nothing surprising
to say, it should say nothing.Rule of Repair: Repair what you can &#8212; but when you
must fail, fail noisily and as soon as possible.Rule of Economy: Programmer time is expensive; conserve it in
preference to machine time.Rule of Generation: Avoid hand-hacking; write programs to write
programs when you can.Rule of Optimization:
Prototype before polishing. Get it working before you optimize
it.Rule of Diversity: Distrust all claims for
one true way.Rule of Extensibility: Design for the future, because it
will be here sooner than you think.The Unix Philosophy in One LessonApplying the Unix PhilosophyAttitude Matters Too
Those who do not understand Unix are condemned to reinvent it, poorly.--
Henry Spencer
Usenet signature, November 1987
Prev
Up
Next
Part I. Context
Home
Culture? What Culture?

Culture? What Culture?
Culture? What Culture?
Prev Chapter 1. Philosophy
Next
Culture? What Culture?
This is a book about Unix programming, but in it we're going to
toss around the words &#8216;culture&#8217;, &#8216;art&#8217;, and
&#8216;philosophy&#8217; a lot. If you are not a programmer, or you
are a programmer who has had little contact with the Unix world, this
may seem strange. But Unix has a culture; it has a distinctive art of
programming; and it carries with it a powerful design
philosophy. Understanding these traditions will help you build better
software, even if you're developing for a non-Unix platform.
Every branch of engineering and design has technical cultures.
In most kinds of engineering, the unwritten traditions of the field
are parts of a working practitioner's education as important as (and,
as experience grows, often more important than) the official handbooks
and textbooks. Senior engineers develop huge bodies of implicit
knowledge, which they pass to their juniors by (as
Zen Buddhists put it)
&#8220;a special transmission, outside the scriptures&#8221;.
Software engineering is generally an exception to this rule;
technology has changed so rapidly, software environments have come and
gone so quickly, that technical cultures have been weak and
ephemeral. There are, however, exceptions to this exception. A very
few software technologies have proved durable enough to evolve strong
technical cultures, distinctive arts, and an associated design
philosophy transmitted across generations of engineers.
The Unix culture is one of these. The Internet culture is
another &#8212; or, in the twenty-first century, arguably the same
one. The two have grown increasingly difficult to separate since the
early 1980s, and in this book we won't try particularly hard.
Prev
Up
Next
Chapter 1. Philosophy
Home
The Durability of Unix

The Durability of Unix
The Durability of Unix
Prev Chapter 1. Philosophy
Next
The Durability of Unix
Unix was born in 1969 and has been in continuous production use
ever since. That's several geologic eras by computer-industry
standards &#8212; older than the PC or workstations or microprocessors
or even video display terminals, and contemporaneous with the first
semiconductor memories. Of all production timesharing systems today,
only IBM's VM/CMS can claim to have existed longer, and Unix machines
have provided hundreds of thousands of times more service hours;
indeed, Unix has probably supported more computing than all other
timesharing systems put together.
Unix has found use on a wider variety of machines than any other
operating system can claim. From supercomputers to handhelds and
embedded networking hardware, through workstations and servers and PCs
and minicomputers, Unix has probably seen more architectures and more
odd hardware than any three other operating systems combined.
Unix has supported a mind-bogglingly wide spectrum of uses. No
other operating system has shone simultaneously as a research vehicle,
a friendly host for technical custom applications, a platform for
commercial-off-the-shelf business software, and a vital component
technology of the Internet.
Confident predictions that Unix would wither away, or be crowded
out by other operating systems, have been made yearly since its
infancy. And yet Unix, in its present-day avatars as
Linux
and BSD and Solaris and MacOS X and half a dozen other variants,
seems stronger than ever today.
Robert Metcalf [the inventor of Ethernet] says that if something
comes along to replace Ethernet, it will be called
&#8220;Ethernet&#8221;, so therefore Ethernet will never
die.[4]  Unix has already undergone
several such transformations.
--
Ken Thompson
At least one of Unix's central technologies &#8212; the C
language &#8212; has been widely naturalized elsewhere. Indeed it is
now hard to imagine doing software engineering without
C as a ubiquitous
common language of systems programming.  Unix also introduced both the
now-ubiquitous tree-shaped file namespace with directory nodes and
the pipeline for connecting programs.
Unix's durability and adaptability have been nothing short of
astonishing. Other technologies have come and gone like mayflies.
Machines have increased a thousandfold in power, languages have
mutated, industry practice has gone through multiple revolutions &#8212;
and Unix hangs in there, still producing, still paying the bills,
and still commanding loyalty from many of the best and brightest
software technologists on the planet.
One of the many consequences of the exponential
power-versus-time curve in computing, and the corresponding pace of
software development, is that 50% of what one knows becomes obsolete
over every 18 months.  Unix does not abolish this phenomenon, but does
do a good job of containing it.  There's a bedrock of unchanging
basics &#8212; languages, system calls, and tool invocations &#8212;
that one can actually keep using for years, even decades.  Elsewhere
it is impossible to predict what will be stable; even entire operating
systems cycle out of use.  Under Unix, there is a fairly sharp
distinction between transient knowledge and lasting knowledge, and one
can know ahead of time (with about 90% certainty) which category
something is likely to fall in when one learns it.  Thus the loyalty
Unix commands.
Much of Unix's stability and success has to be attributed to its
inherent strengths, to design decisions Ken
Thompson,
Dennis Ritchie, Brian
Kernighan, Doug McIlroy, Rob Pike and other early Unix developers made back at
the beginning; decisions that have been proven sound over and
over. But just as much is due to the design philosophy, art of
programming, and technical culture that grew up around Unix in the
early days. This tradition has continuously and successfully
propagated itself in symbiosis with Unix ever since.
[4] In fact, Ethernet has already been replaced by a
different technology with the same name &#8212; twice.  Once when coax
was replaced with twisted pair, and a second time when gigabit
Ethernet came in.
Prev
Up
Next
Culture? What Culture?
Home
The Case against Learning Unix Culture

The Case against Learning Unix Culture
The Case against Learning Unix Culture
Prev Chapter 1. Philosophy
Next
The Case against Learning Unix Culture
Unix's durability and its technical culture are certainly of
interest to people who already like Unix, and perhaps to historians of
technology. But Unix's original application as a general-purpose
timesharing system for mid-sized and larger computers is rapidly
receding into the mists of history, killed off by personal
workstations. And there is certainly room for doubt that it will ever
achieve success in the mainstream business-desktop market now
dominated by
Microsoft.
Outsiders have frequently dismissed Unix as an academic toy or a
hacker's sandbox.  One well-known polemic, the Unix Hater's
Handbook [Garfinkel], follows an
antagonistic line nearly as old as Unix itself in writing its devotees
off as a cult religion of freaks and losers. Certainly the colossal
and repeated blunders of
AT&T,
Sun, Novell,
and other commercial vendors and standards consortia in mispositioning
and mismarketing Unix have become legendary.
Even from within the Unix world, Unix has seemed to be teetering
on the brink of universality for so long as to raise the suspicion
that it will never actually get there. A skeptical outside observer's
conclusion might be that Unix is too useful to die but too awkward to
break out of the back room; a perpetual niche operating system.
What confounds the skeptics' case is, more than anything else,
the rise of Linux and other open-source Unixes (such as the
modern BSD variants).  Unix's culture proved too vital to be smothered
even by a decade of vendor mismanagement.  Today the Unix community
itself has taken control of the technology and marketing, and is
rapidly and visibly solving Unix's problems (in ways we'll examine in
more detail in Chapter 20).
Prev
Up
Next
The Durability of Unix
Home
What Unix Gets Wrong

What Unix Gets Wrong
What Unix Gets Wrong
Prev Chapter 1. Philosophy
Next
What Unix Gets Wrong
For a design that dates from 1969, it is remarkably difficult
to identify design choices in Unix that are unequivocally wrong.
There are several popular candidates, but each is still a subject of
spirited debate not merely among Unix fans but across the wider
community of people who think about and design operating
systems.
Unix files have no structure above byte level. File deletion is
irrevocable.  The Unix security model is arguably too primitive.  Job
control is botched.  There are too many different kinds of names for
things.  Having a file system at all may have been the wrong choice.
We will discuss these technical issues in Chapter 20.
But perhaps the most enduring objections to Unix are consequences of
a feature of its philosophy first made explicit by the designers of
the X windowing system. X strives to provide &#8220;mechanism,
not policy&#8221;, supporting an extremely general set of graphics
operations and deferring decisions about toolkits and interface
look-and-feel (the policy) up to application level. Unix's other
system-level services display similar tendencies; final choices about
behavior are pushed as far toward the user as possible. Unix users
can choose among multiple shells. Unix programs normally provide many
behavior options and sport elaborate preference facilities.
This tendency reflects Unix's heritage as an operating system
designed primarily for technical users, and a consequent belief that
users know better than operating-system designers what their own needs
are.
This tenet was firmly established at Bell Labs by Dick
Hamming[5] who insisted in
the 1950s when computers were rare and expensive, that open-shop
computing, where customers wrote their own programs, was imperative,
because &#8220;it is better to solve the right problem the wrong way
than the wrong problem the right way&#8221;.
--
Doug McIlroy
But the cost of the mechanism-not-policy approach is that when
the user can set policy, the user
must set policy. Nontechnical end-users
frequently find Unix's profusion of options and interface styles
overwhelming and retreat to systems that at least pretend to offer
them simplicity.
In the short term, Unix's laissez-faire approach may lose it a
good many nontechnical users. In the long term, however, it may turn
out that this &#8216;mistake&#8217; confers a critical advantage
&#8212; because policy tends to have a short lifetime, mechanism a
long one. Today's fashion in interface look-and-feel too often becomes
tomorrow's evolutionary dead end (as people using obsolete X toolkits
will tell you with some feeling!). So the flip side of the flip side
is that the &#8220;mechanism, not policy&#8221; philosophy may enable
Unix to renew its relevance long after competitors more tied to one
set of policy or interface choices have faded from
view.[6]
[5] Yes, the Hamming of &#8216;Hamming distance&#8217;
and &#8216;Hamming code&#8217;.
[6] Jim Gettys, one of the architects of X (and a
contributor to this book), has meditated in depth on how X's
laissez-faire style might be productively carried forward in
The Two-Edged Sword [Gettys].  This essay is well worth reading,
both for its specific proposals and for its expression of the Unix
mindset.
Prev
Up
Next
The Case against Learning Unix Culture
Home
What Unix Gets Right

What Unix Gets Right
What Unix Gets Right
Prev Chapter 1. Philosophy
Next
What Unix Gets Right
The explosive recent growth of Linux, and the increasing importance
of the Internet, give us good reasons to suppose that the skeptics'
case is wrong. But even supposing the skeptical assessment is true,
Unix culture is worth learning because there are some things that Unix
and its surrounding culture clearly do better than any
competitors.
Open-Source Software
Though the term &#8220;open
source&#8221;
and the Open Source Definition were not invented until 1998,
peer-review-intensive development of freely shared source code was a key
feature of the Unix culture from its beginnings.
For its first ten years
AT&T's original
Unix, and its primary variant Berkeley Unix, were normally distributed
with source code.  This enabled most of the other good things that
follow here.
Cross-Platform Portability and Open Standards
Unix is still the only operating system that can present a
consistent, documented application programming interface (API) across
a heterogeneous mix of computers, vendors, and special-purpose
hardware. It is the only operating system that can scale from embedded
chips and handhelds, up through desktop machines, through servers, and
all the way to special-purpose number-crunching behemoths and database
back ends.
The Unix API is the closest thing to a hardware-independent
standard for writing truly portable software that exists. It is no
accident that what the IEEE originally called the Portable
Operating System Standard quickly got a suffix added to
its acronym and became
POSIX.  A
Unix-equivalent API was the only credible model for such a
standard.
Binary-only applications for other operating systems die with
their birth environments, but Unix sources are forever. Forever, at
least, given a Unix technical culture that polishes and maintains
them across decades.
The Internet and the World Wide Web
The Defense Department's contract for the first production
TCP/IP stack went to a
Unix development group because the Unix in question was largely open
source.  Besides
TCP/IP, Unix has
become the one indispensable core technology of the Internet Service
Provider industry. Ever since the demise of the TOPS family of operating
systems in the
mid-1980s, most Internet server machines (and effectively all above
the PC level) have relied on Unix.
Not even
Microsoft's awesome
marketing clout has been able to dent Unix's lock on the
Internet. While the
TCP/IP standards (on
which the Internet is based) evolved under
TOPS-10 and
are theoretically separable from Unix, attempts to make them work on
other operating systems have been bedeviled by incompatibilities,
instabilities, and bugs. The theory and specifications are available
to anyone, but the engineering tradition to make them into a solid and
working reality exists only in the Unix world.[7]
The Internet technical culture and the Unix culture began to
merge in the early 1980s, and are now inseparably symbiotic.  The
design of the World Wide Web, the modern face of the Internet, owes as
much to Unix as it does to the ancestral ARPANET.  In particular, the
concept of the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) so central to the Web is
a generalization of the Unix idea of one uniform file namespace
everywhere. To function effectively as an Internet expert, an
understanding of Unix and its culture are indispensable.
The Open-Source Community
The community that originally formed around the early Unix
source distributions never went away &#8212; after the great Internet
explosion of the early 1990s, it recruited an entire new generation of
eager hackers on home
machines.
Today, that community is a powerful support group for all kinds
of software development.  High-quality open-source development tools
abound in the Unix world (we'll examine many in this
book). Open-source Unix applications are usually equal to, and are
often superior to, their proprietary equivalents [Fuzz]. Entire Unix operating systems, with complete
toolkits and basic applications suites, are available for free over
the Internet. Why code from scratch when you can adapt, reuse,
recycle, and save yourself 90% of the work?
This tradition of code-sharing depends heavily on hard-won
expertise about how to make programs cooperative and reusable. And
not by abstract theory, but through a lot of engineering practice
&#8212; unobvious design rules that allow programs to function not just
as isolated one-shot solutions but as synergistic parts of a
toolkit.  A major purpose of this book is to elucidate those rules.
Today, a burgeoning open-source movement is bringing new
vitality, new technical approaches, and an entire generation of bright
young programmers into the Unix tradition. Open-source projects
including the Linux operating system and symbionts such as
Apache and Mozilla
have brought the Unix tradition an unprecedented level of mainstream
visibility and success. The open-source movement seems on the verge of
winning its bid to define the computing infrastructure of tomorrow
&#8212; and the core of that infrastructure will be Unix machines
running on the Internet.
Flexibility All the Way Down
Many operating systems touted as more &#8216;modern&#8217; or
&#8216;user friendly&#8217; than Unix achieve their surface glossiness by
locking users and developers into one interface policy, and offer
an application-programming interface that for all its elaborateness
is rather narrow and rigid. On such systems, tasks the designers
have anticipated are very easy &#8212; but tasks they have not
anticipated are often impossible or at best extremely painful.
Unix, on the other hand, has flexibility in depth. The many ways
Unix provides to glue together programs mean that components of its
basic toolkit can be combined to produce useful effects that the
designers of the individual toolkit parts never anticipated.
Unix's support of multiple styles of program interface (often
seen as a weakness because it increases the perceived complexity of
the system to end users) also contributes to flexibility; no
program that wants to be a simple piece of data plumbing is forced
to carry the complexity overhead of an elaborate GUI.
Unix tradition lays heavy emphasis on keeping programming
interfaces relatively small, clean, and orthogonal &#8212; another trait
that produces flexibility in depth. Throughout a Unix system, easy
things are easy and hard things are at least possible.
Unix Is Fun to Hack
People who pontificate about Unix's technical superiority often
don't mention what may ultimately be its most important strength,
the one that underlies all its successes. Unix is fun to hack.
Unix boosters seem almost ashamed to acknowledge this sometimes,
as though admitting they're having fun might damage their
legitimacy somehow. But it's true; Unix is fun to play with and
develop for, and always has been.
There are not many operating systems that anyone has ever
described as &#8216;fun&#8217;. Indeed, the friction and labor of
development under most other environments has been aptly compared to
kicking a dead whale down the beach.[8] The kindest
adjectives one normally hears are on the order of
&#8220;tolerable&#8221; or &#8220;not too painful&#8221;. In the Unix
world, by contrast, the operating system rewards effort rather than
frustrating it.  People programming under Unix usually come to see
it not as an adversary to be clubbed into doing one's bidding by main
effort but rather as an actual positive help.
This has real economic significance. The fun factor started a
virtuous circle early in Unix's history. People liked Unix, so they
built more programs for it that made it nicer to use. Today people
build entire, production-quality open-source Unix systems as a
hobby. To understand how remarkable this is, ask yourself when you
last heard of anybody cloning OS/360 or VAX VMS or Microsoft
Windows for fun.
The &#8216;fun&#8217; factor is not trivial from a design point
of view, either. The kind of people who become programmers and
developers have &#8216;fun&#8217; when the effort they have to put out
to do a task challenges them, but is just within their
capabilities. &#8216;Fun&#8217; is therefore a sign of peak
efficiency. Painful development environments waste labor and
creativity; they extract huge hidden costs in time, money, and
opportunity.
If Unix were a failure in every other way, the Unix engineering
culture would be worth studying for the ways it keeps the fun
in development &#8212; because that fun is a sign that it makes
developers efficient, effective, and productive.
The Lessons of Unix Can Be Applied Elsewhere
Unix programmers have accumulated decades of experience
while pioneering operating-system features we now take for granted.
Even non-Unix programmers can benefit from studying that Unix
experience. Because Unix makes it relatively easy to apply good design
principles and development methods, it is an excellent place to
learn them.
Other operating systems generally make good practice rather
more difficult, but even so some of the Unix culture's lessons can
transfer. Much Unix code (including all its filters, its major
scripting languages, and many of its code generators) will
port directly to any operating system supporting ANSI
C (for the
excellent reason that C itself was a Unix invention and the
ANSI C library embodies a substantial chunk of Unix's
services!).
[7] Other
operating systems have generally copied or cloned Unix TCP/IP
implementations. It is their loss that they have not generally adopted
the robust tradition of peer review that goes with it, exemplified by
documents like RFC 1025 (TCP and IP Bake
Off).
[8] This was originally
said of the IBM MVS TSO facility by Stephen C. Johnson, perhaps better
known as the author of
yacc.
Prev
Up
Next
What Unix Gets Wrong
Home
Basics of the Unix Philosophy

Basics of the Unix Philosophy
Basics of the Unix Philosophy
Prev Chapter 1. Philosophy
Next
Basics of the Unix Philosophy
The &#8216;Unix philosophy&#8217; originated with Ken
Thompson's
early meditations on how to design a small but capable operating
system with a clean service interface. It grew as the Unix culture
learned things about how to get maximum leverage out of Thompson's
design.  It absorbed lessons from many sources along the way.
The Unix philosophy is not a formal design method. It wasn't
handed down from the high fastnesses of theoretical computer
science as a way to produce theoretically perfect software. Nor is
it that perennial executive's mirage, some way to magically extract
innovative but reliable software on too short a deadline from
unmotivated, badly managed, and underpaid programmers.
The Unix philosophy (like successful folk traditions in other
engineering disciplines) is bottom-up, not top-down. It is pragmatic
and grounded in experience. It is not to be found in official methods
and standards, but rather in the implicit half-reflexive knowledge, the
expertise that the Unix culture transmits. It
encourages a sense of proportion and skepticism &#8212; and shows both
by having a sense of (often subversive) humor.
Doug McIlroy, the inventor of
Unix pipes and one of the
founders of the Unix tradition, had this to say at the time [McIlroy78]:
(i) Make each program do one thing well. To do a new job, build
afresh rather than complicate old programs by adding new
features.
(ii) Expect the output of every program to become the input to
another, as yet unknown, program. Don't clutter output with
extraneous information. Avoid stringently columnar or binary input
formats. Don't insist on interactive input.
(iii) Design and build software, even operating systems, to be
tried early, ideally within weeks. Don't hesitate to throw away the
clumsy parts and rebuild them.
(iv) Use tools in preference to unskilled help to lighten a
programming task, even if you have to detour to build the tools and
expect to throw some of them out after you've finished using
them.
He later summarized it this way (quoted in A Quarter
Century of Unix [Salus]):
This is the Unix philosophy: Write programs that do one
thing and do it well. Write programs to work together. Write
programs to handle text streams, because that is a universal
interface.
Rob Pike, who
became one of the great masters of C, offers a slightly different angle
in Notes on C Programming [Pike]:
Rule 1. You can't tell where a program is going to spend its
time. Bottlenecks occur in surprising places, so don't try to second
guess and put in a speed hack until you've proven that's where the
bottleneck
is.
Rule 2. Measure. Don't tune for speed until you've measured, and
even then don't unless one part of the code overwhelms the
rest.
Rule 3. Fancy algorithms are slow when n is small, and n is usually small. Fancy algorithms have big
constants. Until you know that n is
frequently going to be big, don't get fancy. (Even if n does get big, use Rule 2 first.)
Rule 4. Fancy algorithms are buggier than simple ones, and
they're much harder to implement. Use simple algorithms as well as
simple data structures.
Rule 5. Data dominates. If you've chosen the right data
structures and organized things well, the algorithms will almost
always be self-evident. Data structures, not algorithms, are central
to programming.[9]
Rule 6. There is no Rule 6.
Ken Thompson, the man who designed and implemented the
first Unix, reinforced Pike's rule 4 with a gnomic maxim worthy of a
Zen patriarch:
When in doubt, use brute force.
More of the Unix philosophy was implied not by what these elders
said but by what they did and the example Unix itself set. Looking
at the whole, we can abstract the following ideas:
Rule of Modularity: Write simple parts connected by clean interfaces.
Rule of Clarity: Clarity is better than cleverness.
Rule of Composition: Design programs to be connected to other programs.
Rule of Separation: Separate policy from mechanism;
separate interfaces from engines.
Rule of Simplicity: Design for simplicity; add
complexity only where you must.
Rule of Parsimony: Write a big program only when it is
clear by demonstration that nothing else will do.
Rule of Transparency: Design for visibility to make
inspection and debugging easier.
Rule of Robustness: Robustness is the child of transparency and simplicity.
Rule of Representation: Fold knowledge into data so program
logic can be stupid and robust.
Rule of Least Surprise: In interface design, always do
the least surprising thing.
Rule of Silence: When a program has nothing surprising
to say, it should say nothing.
Rule of Repair: When you must fail, fail noisily and
as soon as possible.
Rule of Economy: Programmer time is expensive; conserve it in
preference to machine time.
Rule of Generation: Avoid hand-hacking; write programs
to write programs when you can.
Rule of Optimization: Prototype before polishing. Get it
working before you optimize it.
Rule of Diversity: Distrust all claims for
&#8220;one true way&#8221;.
Rule of Extensibility: Design for the future, because
it will be here sooner than you think.
If you're new to Unix, these principles are worth some
meditation. Software-engineering texts recommend most of them; but
most other operating systems lack the right tools and traditions to
turn them into practice, so most programmers can't apply them with
any consistency. They come to accept blunt tools, bad designs,
overwork, and bloated code as normal &#8212; and then wonder what Unix
fans are so annoyed about.
Rule of Modularity: Write simple parts connected by clean interfaces.
As Brian Kernighan once observed, &#8220;Controlling complexity
is the essence of computer programming&#8221; [Kernighan-Plauger]. Debugging dominates
development time, and getting a working system out the door is
usually less a result of brilliant design than it is of managing not
to trip over your own feet too many times.
Assemblers, compilers, flowcharting, procedural programming,
structured programming, &#8220;artificial intelligence&#8221;,
fourth-generation languages, object
orientation, and software-development
methodologies without number have been touted and sold as a cure for
this problem. All have failed as cures, if only because they
&#8216;succeeded&#8217; by escalating the normal level of program
complexity to the point where (once again) human brains could barely
cope. As Fred Brooks famously observed [Brooks], there is no silver bullet.
The only way to write complex software that won't fall on its
face is to hold its global complexity down &#8212; to build it out of
simple parts connected by well-defined interfaces, so that most
problems are local and you can have some hope of upgrading
a part without breaking the whole.
Rule of Clarity: Clarity is better than cleverness.
Because maintenance is so important and so expensive, write
programs as if the most important communication they do is not to the
computer that executes them but to the human beings who will read and
maintain the source code in the future (including yourself).
In the Unix tradition, the implications of this advice go beyond
just commenting your code.  Good Unix practice also embraces choosing
your algorithms and implementations for future maintainability.  Buying a
small increase in performance with a large increase in the complexity
and obscurity of your technique is a bad trade &#8212; not merely because
complex code is more likely to harbor bugs, but also because complex
code will be harder to read for future maintainers.
Code that is graceful and clear, on the other hand, is less
likely to break &#8212; and more likely to be instantly comprehended
by the next person to have to change it.  This is important,
especially when that next person might be yourself some years down the
road.
Never struggle to decipher subtle code three times.  Once might
be a one-shot fluke, but if you find yourself having to figure it out
a second time &#8212; because the first was too long ago and you've
forgotten details &#8212; it is time to comment the code so that the
third time will be relatively painless.
--
Henry Spencer
Rule of Composition: Design programs to be connected with other programs.
It's hard to avoid programming overcomplicated monoliths if none
of your programs can talk to each other.
Unix tradition strongly encourages writing programs that
read and write simple, textual, stream-oriented, device-independent
formats.  Under classic Unix, as many programs as possible are written
as simple filters, which take a simple text
stream on input and process it into another simple text stream on
output.
Despite popular mythology, this practice is favored not because
Unix programmers hate graphical user interfaces. It's because if you
don't write programs that accept and emit simple text streams, it's
much more difficult to hook the programs together.
Text streams are to Unix tools as messages are to objects in an
object-oriented setting. The simplicity of the text-stream interface
enforces the encapsulation of the tools.  More elaborate forms of
inter-process communication, such as remote procedure calls, show a
tendency to involve programs with each others' internals too
much.
To make programs composable, make them independent.  A program
on one end of a text stream should care as little as possible about
the program on the other end.  It should be made easy to replace one
end with a completely different implementation without disturbing the
other.
GUIs can be a very good thing. Complex binary data formats are
sometimes unavoidable by any reasonable means. But before writing a
GUI, it's wise to ask if the tricky interactive parts of your
program can be segregated into one piece and the workhorse
algorithms into another, with a simple command stream or
application protocol connecting the two. Before devising a tricky
binary format to pass data around, it's worth experimenting to see
if you can make a simple textual format work and accept a little
parsing overhead in return for being able to hack the data stream
with general-purpose tools.
When a serialized, protocol-like interface is not natural for the
application, proper Unix design is to at least organize as many of the
application primitives as possible into a library with a well-defined
API.  This opens up the possibility that the application can be called
by linkage, or that multiple interfaces can be glued on it for different tasks.
(We discuss these issues in detail in Chapter 7.)
Rule of Separation: Separate policy from mechanism;
separate interfaces from engines.
In our discussion of what Unix gets wrong, we observed that the
designers of X made a basic decision to implement
&#8220;mechanism, not policy&#8221;&#8212;to make X a generic
graphics engine and leave decisions about user-interface style to
toolkits and other levels of the system.  We justified this by
pointing out that policy and mechanism tend to mutate on different
timescales, with policy changing much faster than mechanism. Fashions
in the look and feel of GUI toolkits may come and go, but raster
operations and compositing are forever.
Thus, hardwiring policy and mechanism together has two bad
effects: It makes policy rigid and harder to change in response to user
requirements, and it means that trying to change policy has a strong
tendency to destabilize the mechanisms.
On the other hand, by separating the two we make it possible to
experiment with new policy without breaking mechanisms.  We also make
it much easier to write good tests for the mechanism (policy,
because it ages so quickly, often does not justify the investment).
This design rule has wide application outside the GUI
context.  In general, it implies that we should look for ways to
separate interfaces from engines.
One way to effect that separation is, for example, to write
your application as a library of C service routines that are driven by an
embedded scripting language, with the application flow of control
written in the scripting language rather than C. A classic example of
this pattern is the Emacs editor, which uses
an embedded Lisp interpreter to control editing
primitives written in C.  We discuss this style of design in Chapter 11.
Another way is to separate your application into cooperating
front-end and back-end processes communicating through a specialized
application protocol over sockets; we discuss this kind of design in Chapter 5 and Chapter 7.  The front end implements policy; the
back end, mechanism.  The global complexity of the pair will often be
far lower than that of a single-process monolith implementing the same
functions, reducing your vulnerability to bugs and lowering life-cycle
costs.
Rule of Simplicity: Design for simplicity; add complexity only where you must.
Many pressures tend to make programs more complicated (and
therefore more expensive and buggy). One such pressure is technical
machismo. Programmers are bright people who are (often justly) proud
of their ability to handle complexity and juggle abstractions. Often
they compete with their peers to see who can build the most intricate
and beautiful complexities. Just as often, their ability to design
outstrips their ability to implement and debug, and the result is
expensive failure.
The notion of &#8220;intricate and beautiful complexities&#8221; is
almost an oxymoron.  Unix programmers vie with each other
for &#8220;simple and beautiful&#8221; honors &#8212; a point that's
implicit in these rules, but is well worth making overt.
--
Doug McIlroy
Even more often (at least in the commercial software world)
excessive complexity comes from project requirements that are based on
the marketing fad of the month rather than the reality of what
customers want or software can actually deliver. Many a good design
has been smothered under marketing's pile of &#8220;checklist
features&#8221; &#8212; features that, often, no customer will ever
use. And a vicious circle operates; the competition thinks it has to
compete with chrome by adding more chrome. Pretty soon, massive bloat
is the industry standard and everyone is using huge, buggy programs
not even their developers can love.
Either way, everybody loses in the end.
The only way to avoid these traps is to encourage a software
culture that knows that small is beautiful, that actively resists
bloat and complexity: an engineering tradition that puts a high
value on simple solutions, that looks for ways to break program systems up
into small cooperating pieces, and that reflexively fights attempts to
gussy up programs with a lot of chrome (or, even worse, to design
programs around the chrome).
That would be a culture a lot like Unix's.
Rule of Parsimony: Write a big program only when it is
clear by demonstration that nothing else will do.
&#8216;Big&#8217; here has the sense both of large in volume of
code and of internal complexity.  Allowing programs to get large
hurts maintainability.  Because people are reluctant to throw
away the visible product of lots of work, large programs invite
overinvestment in approaches that are failed or suboptimal.
(We'll examine the issue of the right size of software in more
detail in Chapter 13.)
Rule of Transparency: Design for visibility to make
inspection and debugging easier.
Because debugging often occupies three-quarters or more of
development time, work done early to ease debugging can be a very
good investment. A particularly effective way to ease debugging is to
design for
transparency and
discoverability.
A software system is transparent when you
can look at it and immediately understand what it is doing and how. It
is discoverable when it has facilities for
monitoring and display of internal state so that your program not only
functions well but can be seen to function
well.
Designing for these qualities will have implications throughout
a project. At minimum, it implies that debugging options should not be
minimal afterthoughts. Rather, they should be designed in from the
beginning &#8212; from the point of view that the program should be
able to both demonstrate its own correctness and communicate to future
developers the original developer's mental model of the problem it
solves.
For a program to demonstrate its own correctness, it needs to be
using input and output formats sufficiently simple so that the proper
relationship between valid input and correct output is easy to
check.
The objective of designing for transparency and discoverability
should also encourage simple interfaces that can easily be manipulated
by other programs &#8212; in particular, test and monitoring harnesses
and debugging scripts.
Rule of Robustness: Robustness is the child of transparency and simplicity.
Software is said to be robust when
it performs well under unexpected conditions which stress the designer's
assumptions, as well as under normal conditions.
Most software is fragile and buggy because most programs are too
complicated for a human brain to understand all at once. When you
can't reason correctly about the guts of a program, you can't be sure
it's correct, and you can't fix it if it's broken.
It follows that the way to make robust programs is to make their
internals easy for human beings to reason about. There are two main
ways to do that:
transparency and
simplicity.
For robustness, designing in tolerance for unusual or extremely
bulky inputs is also important.  Bearing in mind the Rule of
Composition helps; input generated by other programs is notorious for
stress-testing software (e.g., the original Unix C compiler reportedly
needed small upgrades to cope well with Yacc output).  The forms
involved often seem useless to humans.  For example, accepting empty
lists/strings/etc., even in places where a human would seldom or never
supply an empty string, avoids having to special-case such situations when
generating the input mechanically.
--
Henry Spencer
One very important tactic for being robust under odd inputs is
to avoid having special cases in your code.  Bugs often lurk in the
code for handling special cases, and in the interactions among parts
of the code intended to handle different special cases.
We observed above that software is
transparent when you can look at it and
immediately see what is going on. It is simple
when what is going on is uncomplicated enough for a human brain to
reason about all the potential cases without strain.  The more
your programs have both of these qualities, the more robust they will
be.
Modularity (simple parts, clean interfaces) is a way to organize
programs to make them simpler. There are other ways to fight for
simplicity. Here's another one.
Rule of Representation: Fold knowledge into data,
so program logic can be stupid and robust.
Even the simplest procedural logic is hard for humans to verify,
but quite complex data structures are fairly easy to model and reason
about. To see this, compare the expressiveness and explanatory power
of a diagram of (say) a fifty-node pointer tree with a flowchart of a
fifty-line program.  Or, compare an array initializer expressing a conversion
table with an equivalent switch statement. The difference in
transparency and
clarity is dramatic. See Rob Pike's Rule 5.
Data is more tractable than program logic. It follows that where
you see a choice between complexity in data structures and
complexity in code, choose the former. More: in evolving a design,
you should actively seek ways to shift complexity from code to
data.
The Unix community did not originate this insight, but a lot of
Unix code displays its influence.  The
C language's facility at
manipulating pointers, in particular, has encouraged the use of
dynamically-modified reference structures at all levels of coding from
the kernel upward. Simple pointer chases in such structures frequently
do duties that implementations in other languages would instead have
to embody in more elaborate procedures.
(We also cover these techniques in Chapter 9.)
Rule of Least Surprise: In interface design, always do
the least surprising thing.
(This is also widely known as the Principle of Least
Astonishment.)
The easiest programs to use are those that demand the least new
learning from the user &#8212; or, to put it another way, the easiest
programs to use are those that most effectively connect to the user's
pre-existing knowledge.
Therefore, avoid gratuitous novelty and excessive cleverness in
interface design.  If you're writing a calculator program,
&#8216;+&#8217; should always mean addition! When designing an
interface, model it on the interfaces of functionally similar or
analogous programs with which your users are likely to be
familiar.
Pay attention to your expected audience.  They may be end
users, they may be other programmers, or they may be system
administrators.  What is least surprising can differ among these
groups.
Pay attention to tradition. The Unix world has rather well-developed
conventions about things like the format of configuration and
run-control files, command-line switches, and the like. These
traditions exist for a good reason: to tame the learning curve.
Learn and use them.
(We'll cover many of these traditions in Chapter 5 and Chapter 10.)
The flip side of the Rule of Least Surprise is to avoid
making things superficially similar but really a little bit different.
This is extremely treacherous because the seeming familiarity raises false
expectations.  It's often better to make things distinctly different than
to make them almost the same.
--
Henry Spencer
Rule of Silence: When a program has nothing surprising
to say, it should say nothing.
One of Unix's oldest and most persistent design rules is that when a
program has nothing interesting or surprising to say, it should
shut up.  Well-behaved Unix programs do their jobs
unobtrusively, with a minimum of fuss and bother.  Silence is
golden.
This &#8220;silence is golden&#8221; rule evolved originally
because Unix predates video displays.  On the slow printing terminals
of 1969, each line of unnecessary output was a serious drain on the
user's time.  That constraint is gone, but excellent reasons for
terseness remain.
I think that the terseness of Unix programs is a central feature
of the style.  When your program's output becomes another's input, it
should be easy to pick out the needed bits.  And for people it is
a human-factors necessity &#8212; important information should not
be mixed in with verbosity about internal program behavior.  If all
displayed information is important, important information is easy to
find.
--
Ken Arnold
Well-designed programs treat the user's attention and
concentration as a precious and limited resource, only to be claimed
when necessary.
(We'll discuss the Rule of Silence and the reasons for it in
more detail at the end of Chapter 11.)
Rule of Repair: Repair what you can &#8212; but when you
must fail, fail noisily and as soon as possible.
Software should be
transparent in the way that it fails, as well
as in normal operation.  It's best when software can cope with
unexpected conditions by adapting to them, but the worst kinds of bugs
are those in which the repair doesn't succeed and the problem quietly
causes corruption that doesn't show up until much later.
Therefore, write your software to cope with incorrect inputs and
its own execution errors as gracefully as possible.  But when it
cannot, make it fail in a way that makes diagnosis of the problem as
easy as possible.
Consider also Postel's Prescription:[10]
&#8220;Be liberal in what you accept, and conservative in what you
send&#8221;. Postel was speaking of network service programs, but the
underlying idea is more general.  Well-designed programs cooperate
with other programs by making as much sense as they can from
ill-formed inputs; they either fail noisily or pass strictly clean and
correct data to the next program in the chain.
However, heed also this warning:
The original HTML documents recommended &#8220;be generous in
what you accept&#8221;, and it has bedeviled us ever since because
each browser accepts a different superset of the specifications.  It
is the specifications that should be generous,
not their interpretation.
--
Doug McIlroy
McIlroy adjures us to design for
generosity rather than compensating for inadequate standards with
permissive implementations.  Otherwise, as he rightly points
out, it's all too easy to end up in tag soup.
Rule of Economy: Programmer time is expensive; conserve it in
preference to machine time.
In the early minicomputer days of Unix, this was still a fairly
radical idea (machines were a great deal slower and more expensive
then). Nowadays, with every development shop and most users (apart
from the few modeling nuclear explosions or doing 3D movie
animation) awash in cheap machine cycles, it may seem too obvious
to need saying.
Somehow, though, practice doesn't seem to have quite caught up
with reality. If we took this maxim really seriously throughout
software development, most applications would be written in
higher-level languages like Perl, Tcl, Python, Java,
Lisp and
even shell &#8212; languages that ease the programmer's burden by
doing their own memory management (see [Ravenbrook]).
And indeed this is happening within the Unix world, though
outside it most applications shops still seem stuck with the
old-school Unix strategy of coding in C (or C++). Later in this book
we'll discuss this strategy and its tradeoffs in detail.
One other obvious way to conserve programmer time is to teach
machines how to do more of the low-level work of programming. This
leads to...
Rule of Generation: Avoid hand-hacking; write programs to write
programs when you can.
Human beings are notoriously bad at sweating the details.
Accordingly, any kind of hand-hacking of programs is a rich source of
delays and errors. The simpler and more abstracted your program
specification can be, the more likely it is that the human designer
will have gotten it right. Generated code (at
every level) is almost always cheaper and more
reliable than hand-hacked.
We all know this is true (it's why we have compilers and
interpreters, after all) but we often don't think about the
implications. High-level-language code that's repetitive and
mind-numbing for humans to write is just as productive a target for a
code generator as machine code. It pays to use code generators when
they can raise the level of abstraction &#8212; that is, when the
specification language for the generator is simpler than the generated
code, and the code doesn't have to be hand-hacked afterwards.
In the Unix tradition, code generators are heavily used to
automate error-prone detail work. Parser/lexer generators are the
classic examples; makefile generators and GUI interface builders are
newer ones.
(We cover these techniques in Chapter 9.)
Rule of Optimization:
Prototype before polishing. Get it working before you optimize
it.
The most basic argument for prototyping first is Kernighan &
Plauger's; &#8220;90% of the functionality delivered now
is better than 100% of it delivered never&#8221;. Prototyping first
may help keep you from investing far too much time for marginal
gains.
For slightly different reasons, Donald
Knuth
(author of The Art Of Computer Programming, one
of the field's few true classics) popularized the observation that
&#8220;Premature optimization is the root of all
evil&#8221;.[11]
And he was right.
Rushing to optimize before the bottlenecks are known may be the
only error to have ruined more designs than feature creep. From
tortured code to incomprehensible data layouts, the results of
obsessing about speed or memory or disk usage at the expense of
transparency and simplicity are everywhere. They spawn innumerable
bugs and cost millions of man-hours &#8212; often, just to get marginal
gains in the use of some resource much less expensive than
debugging time.
Disturbingly often, premature local optimization actually
hinders global optimization (and hence reduces overall performance).
A prematurely optimized portion of a design frequently interferes with
changes that would have much higher payoffs across the whole design,
so you end up with both inferior performance and excessively complex
code.
In the Unix world there is a long-established and very explicit
tradition (exemplified by Rob Pike's comments above and Ken
Thompson's
maxim about brute force) that says: Prototype, then
polish. Get it working before you optimize it. Or: Make it
work first, then make it work fast. &#8216;Extreme programming' guru
Kent Beck,
operating in a different culture, has usefully amplified this to:
&#8220;Make it run, then make it right, then make it
fast&#8221;.
The thrust of all these quotes is the same: get your design
right with an un-optimized, slow, memory-intensive implementation
before you try to tune. Then, tune systematically, looking for the
places where you can buy big performance wins with the smallest
possible increases in local complexity.
Prototyping is important for system design as well as
optimization &#8212; it is much easier to judge whether a prototype
does what you want than it is to read a long specification.  I
remember one development manager at Bellcore who fought against the
&#8220;requirements&#8221; culture years before anybody talked about
&#8220;rapid prototyping&#8221; or &#8220;agile development&#8221;. He
wouldn't issue long specifications; he'd lash together some combination of
shell scripts and awk code that did roughly what was needed, tell the
customers to send him some clerks for a few days, and then have the
customers come in and look at their clerks using the prototype and
tell him whether or not they liked it.  If they did, he would say
&#8220;you can have it industrial strength so-many-months from now at
such-and-such cost&#8221;.  His estimates tended to be accurate, but
he lost out in the culture to managers who believed that requirements
writers should be in control of everything.
--
Mike Lesk
Using prototyping to learn which features you don't have to
implement helps optimization for performance; you don't have to
optimize what you don't write. The most powerful optimization tool in
existence may be the delete key.
One of my most productive days was throwing away 1000 lines of
code.
--
Ken Thompson
(We'll go into a bit more depth about related ideas in Chapter 12.)
Rule of Diversity: Distrust all claims for
&#8220;one true way&#8221;.
Even the best software tools tend to be limited by the
imaginations of their designers. Nobody is smart enough to optimize
for everything, nor to anticipate all the uses to which their software
might be put. Designing rigid, closed software that won't talk
to the rest of the world is an unhealthy form of arrogance.
Therefore, the Unix tradition includes a healthy
mistrust of &#8220;one true way&#8221; approaches to software design or
implementation. It embraces multiple languages, open extensible
systems, and customization hooks everywhere.
Rule of Extensibility: Design for the future, because it
will be here sooner than you think.
If it is unwise to trust other people's claims for &#8220;one
true way&#8221;, it's even more foolish to believe them about your
own designs.  Never assume you have the final answer.  Therefore,
leave room for your data formats and code to grow; otherwise, you
will often find that you are locked into unwise early choices because
you cannot change them while maintaining backward compatibility.
When you design protocols or file formats, make them sufficiently
self-describing to be extensible.  Always, always
either include a version number, or compose the format from
self-contained, self-describing clauses in such a way that new clauses
can be readily added and old ones dropped without confusing
format-reading code.  Unix experience tells us that the marginal
extra overhead of making data layouts self-describing is paid back
a thousandfold by the ability to evolve them forward without
breaking things.
When you design code, organize it so future developers
will be able to plug new functions into the architecture without
having to scrap and rebuild the
architecture.
This rule is not a license to add features you don't yet need; it's
advice to write your code so that adding features later when you
do need them is easy.
Make the joints flexible, and put &#8220;If you ever need
to...&#8221; comments in your code.  You owe this grace to people who
will use and maintain your code after you.
You'll be there in the future too, maintaining code you may have
half forgotten under the press of more recent projects.  When you
design for the future, the sanity you save may be your own.
[9] Pike's original adds &#8220;(See
Brooks p. 102.)&#8221; here. The reference is to an early edition of
The Mythical Man-Month [Brooks]; the quote is &#8220;Show me your
flow charts and conceal your tables and I shall continue to be
mystified, show me your tables and I won't usually need your flow
charts; they'll be obvious&#8221;.
[10] Jonathan
Postel was the first editor of the Internet RFC series of standards,
and one of the principal architects of the Internet. A tribute page is maintained
by the Postel Center for Experimental Networking.
[11] In full: &#8220;We should forget about
small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: premature optimization
is the root of all evil&#8221;. Knuth himself attributes the remark
to C. A. R. Hoare.
Prev
Up
Next
What Unix Gets Right
Home
The Unix Philosophy in One Lesson

Part I. Context
Part I. Context
Prev
Next
Context
Table of Contents1. PhilosophyCulture? What Culture?The Durability of UnixThe Case against Learning Unix CultureWhat Unix Gets WrongWhat Unix Gets RightOpen-Source SoftwareCross-Platform Portability and Open StandardsThe Internet and the World Wide WebThe Open-Source CommunityFlexibility All the Way DownUnix Is Fun to HackThe Lessons of Unix Can Be Applied ElsewhereBasics of the Unix PhilosophyRule of Modularity: Write simple parts connected by clean interfaces.Rule of Clarity: Clarity is better than cleverness.Rule of Composition: Design programs to be connected with other programs.Rule of Separation: Separate policy from mechanism;
separate interfaces from engines.Rule of Simplicity: Design for simplicity; add complexity only where you must.Rule of Parsimony: Write a big program only when it is
clear by demonstration that nothing else will do.Rule of Transparency: Design for visibility to make
inspection and debugging easier.Rule of Robustness: Robustness is the child of transparency and simplicity.Rule of Representation: Fold knowledge into data,
so program logic can be stupid and robust.Rule of Least Surprise: In interface design, always do
the least surprising thing.Rule of Silence: When a program has nothing surprising
to say, it should say nothing.Rule of Repair: Repair what you can &#8212; but when you
must fail, fail noisily and as soon as possible.Rule of Economy: Programmer time is expensive; conserve it in
preference to machine time.Rule of Generation: Avoid hand-hacking; write programs to write
programs when you can.Rule of Optimization:
Prototype before polishing. Get it working before you optimize
it.Rule of Diversity: Distrust all claims for
one true way.Rule of Extensibility: Design for the future, because it
will be here sooner than you think.The Unix Philosophy in One LessonApplying the Unix PhilosophyAttitude Matters Too2. HistoryOrigins and History of Unix, 1969-1995Genesis: 1969&#8211;1971Exodus: 1971&#8211;1980TCP/IP and the Unix Wars: 1980-1990Blows against the Empire: 1991-1995Origins and History of the Hackers, 1961-1995At Play in the Groves of Academe: 1961-1980Internet Fusion and the Free Software Movement: 1981-1991Linux and the Pragmatist Reaction: 1991-1998The Open-Source Movement: 1998 and OnwardThe Lessons of Unix History3. ContrastsThe Elements of Operating-System StyleWhat Is the Operating System's Unifying Idea?Multitasking CapabilityCooperating ProcessesInternal BoundariesFile Attributes and Record StructuresBinary File FormatsPreferred User Interface StyleIntended AudienceEntry Barriers to DevelopmentOperating-System ComparisonsVMSMacOSOS/2Windows NTBeOSMVSVM/CMSLinuxWhat Goes Around, Comes Around
Prev
Up
Next
Author's Acknowledgements
Home
Chapter 1. Philosophy

Chapter 2. History
Chapter 2. History
Prev Part I. Context
Next
Chapter 2. History
A Tale of Two Cultures
Table of ContentsOrigins and History of Unix, 1969-1995Genesis: 1969&#8211;1971Exodus: 1971&#8211;1980TCP/IP and the Unix Wars: 1980-1990Blows against the Empire: 1991-1995Origins and History of the Hackers, 1961-1995At Play in the Groves of Academe: 1961-1980Internet Fusion and the Free Software Movement: 1981-1991Linux and the Pragmatist Reaction: 1991-1998The Open-Source Movement: 1998 and OnwardThe Lessons of Unix History
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.--
George Santayana
The Life of Reason (1905)
The past informs practice.  Unix has a long and colorful history,
much of which is still live as folklore, assumptions, and (too often)
battle scars in the collective memory of Unix programmers.  In this
chapter we'll survey the history of Unix, with an eye to explaining
why, in 2003, today's Unix culture looks the way it does.
Prev
Up
Next
Attitude Matters Too
Home
Origins and History of Unix, 1969-1995

Who Should Read This Book
Who Should Read This Book
Prev Preface
Next
Who Should Read This Book
You should read this book if you are an experienced Unix
programmer who is often in the position of either educating novice
programmers or debating partisans of other operating systems, and you
find it hard to articulate the benefits of the Unix approach.
You should read this book if you are a C, C++, or Java
programmer with experience on other operating systems and you are
about to start a Unix-based project.
You should read this book if you are a Unix user with
novice-level up to middle-level skills in the operating system, but
little development experience, and want to learn how to design
software effectively under Unix.
You should read this book if you are a non-Unix programmer who
has figured out that the Unix tradition might have something to
teach you. We believe you're right, and that the Unix philosophy can
be exported to other operating systems. So we will pay more
attention to non-Unix environments (especially Microsoft operating
systems) than is usual in a Unix book; and when tools and case
studies are portable, we say so.
You should read this book if you are an application architect
considering platforms or implementation strategies for a major
general-market or vertical application.  It will help you
understand the strengths of Unix as a development platform, and
of the Unix tradition of open source as a development method.
You should not read this book if what you
are looking for is the details of C coding or how to use the Unix
kernel API.  There are many good books on these topics;
Advanced Programming in the Unix Environment
[Stevens92] is classic among explorations of the Unix
API, and The Practice of Programming [Kernighan-Pike99] is recommended
reading for all C programmers (indeed for all programmers in any
language).
Prev
Up
Next
Preface
Home
How to Use This Book

How to Use This Book
How to Use This Book
Prev Preface
Next
How to Use This Book
This book is both practical and philosophical. Some parts are
aphoristic and general, others will examine specific case studies in
Unix development. We will precede or follow general principles and
aphorisms with examples that illustrate them: examples drawn not from
toy demonstration programs but rather from real working code that is
in use every day.
We have deliberately avoided filling the book with lots of code
or specification-file examples, even though in many places this
might have made it easier to write (and in some places perhaps
easier to read!). Most books about programming give too many
low-level details and examples, but fail at giving the reader a
high-level feel for what is really going on. In this book, we
prefer to err in the opposite direction.
Therefore, while you will often be invited to read code and
specification files, relatively few are actually included in the book.
Instead, we point you at examples on the Web.
Absorbing these examples will help solidify the principles you
learn into semi-instinctive working knowledge. Ideally, you should
read this book near the console of a running Unix system, with a Web
browser handy. Any Unix will do, but the software case studies are
more likely to be preinstalled and immediately available for
inspection on a Linux system. The pointers in the book are invitations
to browse and experiment. Introduction of these pointers is paced so
that wandering off to explore for a while won't break up exposition
that has to be continuous.
Note: While we have made every effort to cite URLs that should
remain stable and usable, there is no way we can guarantee this. If
you find that a cited link has gone stale, use common sense and do
a phrase search with your favorite Web search engine. Where possible
we suggest ways to do this near the URLs we cite.
Most abbreviations used in this book are expanded at first use.
For convenience, we have also provided a glossary in an appendix.
References are usually by author name.  Numbered footnotes are
for URLs that would intrude on the text or that we suspect might be
perishable; also for asides, war stories, and jokes.[2]
To make this book more accessible to less technical readers, we
invited some non-programmers to read it and identify terms that seemed
both obscure and necessary to the flow of exposition.  We also use
footnotes for definitions of elementary terms that an experienced
programmer is unlikely to need.
[2] This particular footnote is dedicated to Terry Pratchett, whose
use of footnotes is quite...inspiring.
Prev
Up
Next
Who Should Read This Book
Home
Related References

Related References
Related References
Prev Preface
Next
Related References
Some famous papers and a few books by Unix's early developers
have mined this territory before. Kernighan and Pike's
The Unix Programming Environment [Kernighan-Pike84] stands out
among these and is rightly considered a classic. But today it shows
its age a bit; it doesn't cover the Internet, and the World Wide Web
or the new wave of interpreted languages like Perl, Tcl, and
Python.
About halfway into the composition of this book, we learned of
Mike Gancarz's The Unix Philosophy [Gancarz].  This book is excellent within its
range, but did not attempt to cover the full spectrum of topics we
felt needed to be addressed.  Nevertheless we are grateful to the
author for the reminder that the very simplest Unix design patterns
have been the most persistent and successful ones.
The Pragmatic Programmer [Hunt-Thomas] is a witty and wise
disquisition on good design practice pitched at a slightly
different level of the software-design craft (more about coding, less
about higher-level partitioning of problems) than this book. The
authors' philosophy is an outgrowth of Unix experience, and it is an
excellent complement to this book.
The Practice of Programming [Kernighan-Pike99] covers some of
the same ground as The Pragmatic Programmer
from a position deep within the Unix tradition.
Finally (and with admitted intent to provoke) we recommend
Zen Flesh, Zen Bones [Reps-Senzaki], an important collection of
Zen Buddhist primary sources.  References to Zen are scattered throughout
this book.  They are included because Zen provides a vocabulary for
addressing some ideas that turn out to be very important for software
design but are otherwise very difficult to hold in the mind.  Readers
with religious attachments are invited to consider Zen not as a
religion but as a therapeutic form of mental discipline &#8212; which,
in its purest non-theistic forms, is exactly what Zen is.
Prev
Up
Next
How to Use This Book
Home
Conventions Used in This Book

Conventions Used in This Book
Conventions Used in This Book
Prev Preface
Next
Conventions Used in This Book
The term &#8220;UNIX&#8221; is technically and legally a
trademark of The Open Group, and should formally be used only for
operating systems which are certified to have passed The Open Group's
elaborate standards-conformance tests. In this book we use
&#8220;Unix&#8221; in the looser sense widely current among
programmers, to refer to any operating system (whether formally
Unix-branded or not) that is either genetically descended from Bell
Labs's ancestral Unix code or written in close imitation of its
descendants. In particular, Linux (from which we draw most of our
examples) is a Unix under this definition.
This book employs the Unix manual page convention of tagging
Unix facilities with a following manual section in parentheses,
usually on first introduction when we want to emphasize that this is a
Unix command.  Thus, for example, read &#8220;munger(1)&#8221; as
&#8220;the &#8216;munger&#8217; program, which will be documented in
section 1 (user tools) of the Unix manual pages, if it's present on
your system&#8221;. Section 2 is C system calls, section 3 is C
library calls, section 5 is file formats and protocols, section 8 is
system administration tools. Other sections vary among Unixes but
are not cited in this book.  For more, type man 1
man at your Unix shell prompt (older System V Unixes may
require man -s 1 man).
Sometimes we mention a Unix application (such as
Emacs), without a manual-section suffix and
capitalized.  This is a clue that the name actually represents a
well-established family of Unix programs with essentially the same
function, and we are discussing generic properties of all of them.
Emacs, for example, includes
xemacs.
At various points later in this book we refer to
&#8216;old school&#8217; and &#8216;new school&#8217; methods.  As
with rap music, new-school starts about 1990.  In this context, it's
associated with the rise of scripting
languages, GUIs, open-source Unixes, and the
Web.  Old-school refers to the pre-1990 (and especially pre-1985)
world of expensive (shared) computers, proprietary Unixes, scripting
in shell, and C everywhere.  This difference is worth pointing out
because cheaper and less memory-constrained machines have wrought some
significant changes on the Unix programming style.
Prev
Up
Next
Related References
Home
Our Case Studies

Our Case Studies
Our Case Studies
Prev Preface
Next
Our Case Studies
A lot of books on programming rely on toy examples constructed
specifically to prove a point. This one won't. Our case studies
will be real, pre-existing pieces of software that are in
production use every day. Here are some of the major ones:
cdrtools/xcdroast
These two separate projects are usually used together.
The cdrtools package is a set of
CLI tools for writing CD-ROMs; Web search for &#8220;cdrtools&#8221;.
The xcdroast application is a
GUI front end for cdrtools; see the xcdroast project site.
fetchmail
The fetchmail program
retrieves mail from remote-mail servers using the POP3 or IMAP
post-office protocols. See the fetchmail home page (or search for
&#8220;fetchmail&#8221; on the Web).GIMP
The GIMP (GNU Image
Manipulation Program) is a full-featured paint, draw, and
image-manipulation program that can edit a huge variety of graphical
formats in sophisticated ways. Sources are available from the GIMP home page (or search for
"GIMP" on the Web).mutt
The
mutt mail user agent is the current
best-of-breed among text-based Unix electronic mail agents, with notably good
support for MIME
(Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) and the use of privacy aids
such as PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) and GPG (GNU Privacy Guard).  Source
code and executable binaries are available at the Mutt project site.xmlto
The xmlto command renders
DocBook and other XML documents in various output formats, including
HTML and text and PostScript.  For sources and documentation, see the xmlto project site.
To minimize the amount of code the user needs to read to
understand the examples, we have tried to choose case studies that can
be used more than once, ideally to illustrate several different design
principles and practices.  For this same reason, many of the examples
are from my projects.  No claim that these are the best possible ones
is implied, merely that I find them sufficiently familiar to be useful
for multiple expository purposes.
Prev
Up
Next
Conventions Used in This Book
Home
Author's Acknowledgements

Chapter 7. Multiprogramming
Chapter 7. Multiprogramming
Prev Part II. Design
Next
Chapter 7. Multiprogramming
Separating Processes to Separate Function
Table of ContentsSeparating Complexity Control from Performance TuningTaxonomy of Unix IPC MethodsHanding off Tasks to Specialist ProgramsPipes, Redirection, and FiltersWrappersSecurity Wrappers and Bernstein ChainingSlave ProcessesPeer-to-Peer Inter-Process CommunicationProblems and Methods to AvoidObsolescent Unix IPC MethodsRemote Procedure CallsThreads &#8212; Threat or Menace?Process Partitioning at the Design Level
If we believe in data structures, we must believe in independent
(hence simultaneous) processing. For why else would we collect items
within a structure?  Why do we tolerate languages that give us the one
without the other?--
Alan Perlis
Epigrams in Programming, in ACM SIGPLAN (Vol 17 #9, 1982)
The most characteristic program-modularization technique of Unix
is splitting large programs into multiple cooperating processes.  This
has usually been called &#8216;multiprocessing&#8217; in the Unix world,
but in this book we revive the older term
&#8216;multiprogramming&#8217; to avoid confusion with
multiprocessor hardware implementations.
Multiprogramming is a particularly murky area of design, one in
which there are few guidelines to good practice.  Many programmers
with excellent judgment about how to break up code into subroutines
nevertheless wind up writing whole applications as monster
single-process monoliths that founder on their own internal
complexity.
The Unix style of design applies the do-one-thing-well approach
at the level of cooperating programs as well as cooperating routines
within a program, emphasizing small programs connected by well-defined
interprocess communication or by shared files. Accordingly, the Unix operating
system encourages us to break our programs into simpler subprocesses,
and to concentrate on the interfaces between these subprocesses. It
does this in at least three fundamental ways:
by making process-spawning cheap;
by providing methods (shellouts, I/O redirection, pipes,
message-passing, and sockets) that make it relatively easy for
processes to communicate;
by encouraging the use of simple, transparent, textual
data formats that can be passed through
pipes and sockets.
Inexpensive process-spawning and easy process control are
critical enablers for the Unix style of programming. On an operating
system such as VAX VMS, where starting processes is expensive
and slow and requires special privileges, one must build monster
monoliths because one has no choice. Fortunately the trend in the Unix
family has been toward lower
fork(2)
overhead rather than higher. Linux, in particular, is famously efficient
this way, with a process-spawn faster than thread-spawning on many
other operating systems.[65]
Historically, many Unix programmers have been encouraged to
think in terms of multiple cooperating processes by experience with
shell programming.  Shell makes it relatively easy to set up groups of
multiple processes connected by
pipes, running either
in background or foreground or a mix of the two.
In the remainder of this chapter, we'll look at the
implications of cheap process-spawning and discuss how and when to
apply pipes, sockets, and other interprocess communication (IPC)
methods to partition your design into cooperating processes. (In the
next chapter, we'll apply the same separation-of-functions philosophy
to interface design.)
While the benefit of breaking programs up into cooperating
processes is a reduction in global complexity, the cost is that we
have to pay more attention to the design of the protocols which are
used to pass information and commands between processes.  (In software
systems of all kinds, bugs collect at interfaces.)
In Chapter 5 we
looked at the lower level of this design problem &#8212; how to lay
out application protocols that are transparent, flexible and
extensible.  But there is a second, higher level to the problem which
we blithely ignored.  That is the problem of designing state machines
for each side of the communication.
It is not hard to apply good style to the syntax of application
protocols, given models like SMTP or BEEP or XML-RPC.  The real
challenge is not protocol syntax but protocol
logic&#8212;designing a protocol that is both
sufficiently expressive and deadlock-free. Almost as importantly, the
protocol has to be seen to be expressive and
deadlock-free; human beings attempting to model the behavior of the
communicating programs in their heads and verify its correctness must
be able to do so.
In our discussion, therefore, we will focus on the kinds of
protocol logic one naturally uses with each kind of interprocess
communication.
[65] See, for example, the results
quoted in Improving Context Switching Performance of Idle
Tasks under Linux [Appleton].
Prev
Up
Next
Designing for Maintainability
Home
Separating Complexity Control from Performance Tuning

Chapter 4. Modularity
Chapter 4. Modularity
Prev Part II. Design
Next
Chapter 4. Modularity
Keeping It Clean, Keeping It Simple
Table of ContentsEncapsulation and Optimal Module SizeCompactness and OrthogonalityCompactnessOrthogonalityThe SPOT RuleCompactness and the Strong Single CenterThe Value of DetachmentSoftware Is a Many-Layered ThingTop-Down versus Bottom-UpGlue LayersCase Study: C Considered as Thin GlueLibrariesCase Study: GIMP PluginsUnix and Object-Oriented LanguagesCoding for Modularity
There are two ways of constructing a software design.  One is to make
it so simple that there are obviously no deficiencies; the other is to
make it so complicated that there are no obvious deficiencies. The
first method is far more difficult.--
C. A. R. Hoare
The Emperor's Old Clothes, CACM February 1981
There is a natural hierarchy of code-partitioning methods that
has evolved as programmers have had to manage ever-increasing levels
of complexity.  In the beginning, everything was one big lump of
machine code.  The earliest procedural languages brought in the notion
of partition by subroutine.  Then we invented service libraries to
share common utility functions among multiple programs. Next, we
invented separated address spaces and communicating processes.  Today we
routinely distribute program systems across multiple hosts separated
by thousands of miles of network cable.
The early developers of Unix were among the pioneers in software
modularity.  Before them, the Rule of Modularity was computer-science
theory but not engineering practice.  In Design
Rules [Baldwin-Clark], a path-breaking
study of the economics of modularity in engineering design, the
authors use the development of the computer industry as a case study
and argue that the Unix community was in fact the first to
systematically apply modular decomposition to production software, as
opposed to hardware.  Modularity of hardware has of course been one
of the foundations of engineering since the adoption of standard
screw threads in the late 1800s.
The Rule of Modularity bears amplification here: The only way to
write complex software that won't fall on its face is to build it out
of simple modules connected by well-defined interfaces, so that most
problems are local and you can have some hope of fixing or optimizing
a part without breaking the whole.
The tradition of being careful about modularity and of paying
close attention to issues like
orthogonality
and compactness are still much deeper in the bone among Unix
programmers than elsewhere.
Early Unix programmers became good at modularity because they had to
be.  An OS is one of the most complicated pieces of code around.  If
it is not well structured, it will fall apart.  There were a couple of
early failures at building Unix that were scrapped.  One can blame the
early (structureless) C for this, but basically it was because the OS
was too complicated to write.  We needed both refinements in tools (like C
structures) and good practice in using them (like Rob Pike's rules for
programming) before we could tame that complexity.
--
Ken Thompson
Early Unix hackers struggled with this in many ways.  In the
languages of 1970 function calls were expensive, either because call
semantics were complicated (PL/1.  Algol) or because the compiler was
optimizing for other things like fast inner loops at the expense of
call time.  Thus, code tended to be written in big lumps.  Ken and
several of the other early Unix developers knew modularity was a good
idea, but they remembered PL/1 and were reluctant to write small
functions lest performance go to hell.
Dennis Ritchie encouraged modularity by telling all and sundry that
function calls were really, really cheap in C.  Everybody started
writing small functions and modularizing.  Years later we found out
that function calls were still expensive on the PDP-11, and VAX code
was often spending 50% of its time in the CALLS instruction.  Dennis
had lied to us!  But it was too late; we were all hooked...
--
Steve Johnson
All programmers today, Unix natives or not, are taught to
modularize at the subroutine level within programs.  Some learn the
art of doing this at the module or abstract-data-type level and call
that &#8216;good design&#8217;.  The
design-patterns movement is making a noble effort to
push up a level from there and discover successful design abstractions
that can be applied to organize the large-scale structure of
programs.
Getting better at all these kinds of problem partitioning is a
worthy goal, and many excellent treatments of them are available
elsewhere.  We shall not attempt to cover all the issues relating to
modularity within programs in too much detail: first, because that is
a subject for an entire volume (or several volumes) in itself; and
second, because this is a book about the art of
Unix programming.
What we will do here is examine more specifically what the Unix
tradition teaches us about how to follow the Rule of Modularity.  In
this chapter, our examples will live within process units.  Later, in
Chapter 7, we'll
examine the circumstances under which partitioning programs into
multiple cooperating processes is a good idea, and discuss more
specific techniques for doing that partitioning.
Prev
Up
Next
Part II. Design
Home
Encapsulation and Optimal Module Size

Chapter 5. Textuality
Chapter 5. Textuality
Prev Part II. Design
Next
Chapter 5. Textuality
Good Protocols Make Good Practice
Table of ContentsThe Importance of Being TextualCase Study: Unix Password File FormatCase Study: .newsrc FormatCase Study: The PNG Graphics File FormatData File MetaformatsDSV StyleRFC 822 FormatCookie-Jar FormatRecord-Jar FormatXMLWindows INI FormatUnix Textual File Format ConventionsThe Pros and Cons of File CompressionApplication Protocol DesignCase Study: SMTP, the Simple Mail Transfer ProtocolCase Study: POP3, the Post Office ProtocolCase Study: IMAP, the Internet Message Access ProtocolApplication Protocol MetaformatsThe Classical Internet Application MetaprotocolHTTP as a Universal Application ProtocolBEEP: Blocks Extensible Exchange ProtocolXML-RPC, SOAP, and Jabber
It's a well-known fact that computing devices such as the abacus
were invented thousands of years ago. But it's not well known that the
first use of a common computer protocol occurred in the Old
Testament. This, of course, was when Moses aborted the Egyptians'
process with a control-sea.--
Tom Galloway
rec.arts.comics, February 1992
In this chapter, we'll look at what the Unix tradition has to
tell us about two different kinds of design that are closely related:
the design of file formats for retaining application data in permanent
storage, and the design of application protocols for passing data
and commands between cooperating programs, possibly over a
network.
What unifies these two kinds of design is that they both involve
the serialization of in-memory data structures.  For the internal
operation of computer programs, the most convenient representation of
a complex data structure is one in which all fields have the machine's
native data format (e.g. two's-complement binary for integers) and all
pointers are actual memory addresses (as opposed, say, to being named
references).  But these representations are not well suited to storage
and transmission; memory addresses in the data structure lose their
meaning outside memory, and emitting raw native data formats causes
interoperability problems passing data between machines with different
conventions (big- vs. little-endian, say, or 32-bit vs. 64-bit).
For transmission and storage, the traversable, quasi-spatial
layout of data structures like linked lists needs to be flattened or
serialized into a byte-stream representation from which the structure
can later be recovered.  The serialization (save) operation is
sometimes called marshaling and its inverse
(load) operation unmarshaling.  These terms
are usually applied with respect to objects in an
OO
language like C++ or Python or Java, but could be used with equal justice
of operations like loading a graphics file into the internal storage
of a graphics editor and saving it out after modifications.
A significant percentage of what C and C++ programmers maintain is ad-hoc code for
marshaling and unmarshaling operations &#8212; even when the
serialized representation chosen is as simple as a binary structure
dump (a common technique under non-Unix environments).  Modern
languages like Python and Java tend to have built-in unmarshal and
marshal functions that can be applied to any object or byte-stream
representing an object, and that reduce this labor substantially.
But these naïve methods are often unsatisfactory for
various reasons, including both the machine-interoperability problems
we mentioned above and the negative trait of being opaque to other
tools.  When the application is a network protocol, economy may demand
that an internal data structure (such as, say, a message with source
and destination addresses) be serialized not into a single blob of
data but into a series of attempted transactions or messages which the
receiving machine may reject (so that, for example, a large message can
be rejected if the destination address is invalid).
Interoperability,
transparency,
extensibility,
and storage or transaction economy: these are the important themes in
designing file formats and application protocols.  Interoperability
and transparency demand that we focus such designs on clean data
representations, rather than putting convenience of implementation or
highest possible performance first.  Extensibility also favors textual
protocols, since binary ones are often harder to extend or subset
cleanly.  Transaction economy sometimes pushes in the opposite
direction &#8212; but we shall see that putting that criterion first
is a form of premature
optimization
that it is often wise to resist.
Finally, we must note a difference between data file formats and
the run-control files that are often used to set the startup options
of Unix programs.  The most basic difference is that (with sporadic
exceptions like GNU Emacs's configuration interface) programs don't
normally modify their own run-control files &#8212; the information
flow is one-way, from file read at startup time to application
settings.  Data-file formats, on the other hand, associate properties
with named resources and are both read and written by their
applications. Configuration files are generally hand-edited and small,
whereas data files are program-generated and can become arbitrarily
large.
Historically, Unix has related but different sets of conventions
for these two kinds of representation.  The conventions for run
control files are surveyed in Chapter 10; only conventions for data files are
examined in this chapter.
Prev
Up
Next
Coding for Modularity
Home
The Importance of Being Textual

Chapter 11. Interfaces
Chapter 11. Interfaces
Prev Part II. Design
Next
Chapter 11. Interfaces
User-Interface Design Patterns in the Unix Environment
Table of ContentsApplying the Rule of Least SurpriseHistory of Interface Design on UnixEvaluating Interface DesignsTradeoffs between CLI and Visual InterfacesCase Study: Two Ways to Write a Calculator ProgramTransparency, Expressiveness, and ConfigurabilityUnix Interface Design PatternsThe Filter PatternThe Cantrip PatternThe Source PatternThe Sink PatternThe Compiler PatternThe ed patternThe Roguelike PatternThe &#8216;Separated Engine and Interface&#8217; PatternThe CLI Server PatternLanguage-Based Interface PatternsApplying Unix Interface-Design PatternsThe Polyvalent-Program PatternThe Web Browser as a Universal Front EndSilence Is Golden
All our knowledge has its origins in our perceptions.--
Leonardo Da Vinci
The interface of a program is the sum of all the ways that it
communicates with human users and other programs.  In Chapter 10, we discussed the use of environment
variables, switches, run-control files and other parts of
start-up-time interfaces. In this chapter, we'll untangle the history
and explain the pragmatics of Unix interfaces after startup time.
Because user-interface code normally consumes 40% or more of development
time, knowing good design patterns is especially important here in
order to avoid a lot of false starts and time-intensive
rewrites.
In the Unix tradition of interface design, we encounter two
themes over and over again. One is anticipatory design for
communication with other programs; the other is the Rule of Least
Surprise.
Unix programs can give you extra power from being used in
synergistic combinations; we discussed various methods for hooking
together such combinations in Chapter 7. The &#8216;other programs&#8217; part
of Unix interface design is not an afterthought or a marginal case as
it is under many other operating systems. Rather, it is a central
challenge that has to be balanced and integrated carefully with the
demands of interface design for human users.
Much of Unix-community tradition about program interface design
may seem odd and arbitrary &#8212; or even, in the age of the GUI,
downright regressive &#8212; when you encounter that tradition for the
first time.  But in spite of various blemishes and irregularities,
that tradition has an inner logic to it which is worth learning and
understanding. It reflects heuristics accumulated over Unix's long
history about ways to do effective communication both with human
beings and with other programs. And it includes a set of conventions
which create commonalities between programs &#8212; it defines
&#8216;least surprising&#8217; alternatives for a wide range of common
interface-design problems.
After startup, programs normally get input or commands from the
following sources:
Data and commands presented on the program's standard
input.
Inputs passed through IPC, such as X server events and
network messages.
Files and devices in known locations (such as a data file name
passed to or computed by the program).
Programs can emit results in all the same ways (with output
going to standard output).
Some Unix programs are graphical, some have screen-oriented
character interfaces, and some use a starkly simple text-filter
design unchanged from the days of mechanical teletypes. To the
uninitiated, it is often far from obvious why any given program
uses the style it does &#8212; or, indeed, why Unix supports such a
plethora of interface styles at all.
Unix has several competing interface styles.  All are still
alive for a reason; they're optimized for different situations. By
understanding the fit between task and interface style, you will learn
how to choose the right styles for the jobs you need to do.
Prev
Up
Next
On Breaking These Rules
Home
Applying the Rule of Least Surprise

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Chapter 9. Generation
Chapter 9. Generation
Prev Part II. Design
Next
Chapter 9. Generation
Pushing the Specification Level Upwards
Table of ContentsData-Driven ProgrammingCase Study: asciiCase Study: Statistical Spam FilteringCase Study: Metaclass Hacking in fetchmailconfAd-hoc Code GenerationCase Study: Generating Code for the ascii DisplaysCase Study: Generating HTML Code for a Tabular List
The programmer at wit's end ... can often do best by
disentangling himself from his code, rearing back, and
contemplating his data. Representation is the essence of
programming.--
Fred Brooks
The Mythical Man-Month, Anniversary Edition (1975-1995), p. 103
In Chapter 1 we
observed that human beings are better at visualizing data than they
are at reasoning about control flow.  We recapitulate: To see this,
compare the expressiveness and explanatory power of a diagram of a
fifty-node pointer tree with a flowchart of a fifty-line program. Or
(better) of an array initializer expressing a conversion table with an
equivalent switch statement. The difference in
transparency and clarity is
dramatic.[97]
Data is more tractable than program logic. That's
true whether the data is an ordinary table, a declarative markup
language, a templating system, or a set of macros that will expand to
program logic.  It's good practice to move as much of the complexity
in your design as possible away from procedural code and into
data, and good practice to pick data representations that are
convenient for humans to maintain and manipulate.  Translating
those representations into forms that are convenient for machines
to process is another job for machines, not for humans.
Another important advantage of higher-level, more declarative
notations is that they lend themselves better to compile-time checking.
Procedural notations inherently have complex runtime behavior which is
difficult to analyze at compile time.  Declarative notations give the
implementation much more leverage for finding mistakes, by permitting much
more thorough understanding of the intended behavior.
--
Henry Spencer
These insights ground in theory a set of practices that have
always been an important part of the Unix programmer's toolkit &#8212;
very high-level languages, data-driven programming, code generators,
and domain-specific minilanguages.  What unifies these is that they
are all ways of lifting the generation of code up some levels, so that
specifications can be smaller. We've previously noted that defect
densities tend to be nearly constant across programming languages; all
these practices mean that whatever malign forces generate our bugs
will get fewer lines to wreak their havoc on.
In Chapter 8 we
discussed the uses of domain-specific minilanguages. In Chapter 14 we'll make the argument for
very-high-level languages.  In this chapter we'll look at some
design studies in data-driven programming and a few examples of ad-hoc
code generation; we'll look at some code-generation tools in Chapter 15.  As with minilanguages, these methods can
enable you to drastically cut the line count of your programs, and
correspondingly lower debugging time and maintenance costs.
[97] For further development of this point see
[Bentley].
Prev
Up
Next
Designing Minilanguages
Home
Data-Driven Programming

Chapter 14. Languages
Chapter 14. Languages
Prev Part III. Implementation
Next
Chapter 14. Languages
To C or Not To C?
Table of ContentsUnix's Cornucopia of LanguagesWhy Not C?Interpreted Languages and Mixed StrategiesLanguage EvaluationsCC++ShellPerlTclPythonJavaEmacs LispTrends for the FutureChoosing an X Toolkit
The limits of my language are the limits of my world.--
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 5.6, 1918
Prev
Up
Next
Part III. Implementation
Home
Unix's Cornucopia of Languages

Chapter 15. Tools
Chapter 15. Tools
Prev Part III. Implementation
Next
Chapter 15. Tools
The Tactics of Development
Table of ContentsA Developer-Friendly Operating SystemChoosing an EditorUseful Things to Know about viUseful Things to Know about EmacsThe Antireligious Choice: Using BothSpecial-Purpose Code Generatorsyacc and lexCase Study: Glademake: Automating Your RecipesBasic Theory of makemake in Non-C/C++
DevelopmentUtility ProductionsGenerating MakefilesVersion-Control SystemsWhy Version Control?Version Control by HandAutomated Version ControlUnix Tools for Version ControlRuntime DebuggingProfilingCombining Tools with EmacsEmacs and makeEmacs and Runtime DebuggingEmacs and Version ControlEmacs and ProfilingLike an IDE, Only Better
Unix is user-friendly &#8212; it's just choosy about who its
friends are.--Anonymous
Prev
Up
Next
Choosing an X Toolkit
Home
A Developer-Friendly Operating System

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Chapter 16. Reuse
Chapter 16. Reuse
Prev Part III. Implementation
Next
Chapter 16. Reuse
On Not Reinventing the Wheel
Table of ContentsThe Tale of J. Random NewbieTransparency as the Key to ReuseFrom Reuse to Open SourceThe Best Things in Life Are OpenWhere to Look?Issues in Using Open-Source SoftwareLicensing IssuesWhat Qualifies as Open SourceStandard Open-Source LicensesWhen You Need a Lawyer
When the superior man refrains from acting, his force is felt
for a thousand miles.--
Tao Te Ching (as popularly mistranslated)
Reluctance to do unnecessary work is a great virtue in
programmers. If the Chinese sage Lao-Tze were alive today and still
teaching the way of the Tao, he would probably be mistranslated as:
When the superior programmer refrains from coding, his force is felt
for a thousand miles. In fact, recent translators have suggested that
the Chinese term wu-wei that has
traditionally been rendered as &#8220;inaction&#8221; or
&#8220;refraining from action&#8221; should probably be read as
&#8220;least action&#8221; or &#8220;most efficient action&#8221; or
&#8220;action in accordance with natural law&#8221;, which is an even
better description of good engineering practice!
Remember the Rule of Economy.  Re-inventing fire and the wheel
for every new project is terribly wasteful.  Thinking time is precious
and very valuable relative to all the other inputs that go into
software development; accordingly, it should be spent solving new
problems rather than rehashing old ones for which known solutions
already exist. This attitude gives the best return both in the
&#8220;soft&#8221; terms of developing human capital and in the
&#8220;hard&#8221; terms of economic return on development
investment.
Reinventing the wheel is bad not only because it
wastes time, but because reinvented wheels are often square.  There is an
almost irresistible temptation to economize on reinvention time by
taking a shortcut to a crude and poorly-thought-out version, which
in the long run often turns out to be false economy.
--
Henry Spencer
The most effective way to avoid reinventing the wheel is to
borrow someone else's design and implementation of it. In other
words, to reuse code.
Unix supports reuse at every level from individual library
modules up to entire programs, which Unix helps you script and
recombine.  Systematic reuse is one of the most important
distinguishing behaviors of Unix programmers, and the experience of
using Unix should teach you a habit of trying to prototype solutions
by combining existing components with a minimum of new invention,
rather than rushing to write standalone code that will only be used
once.
The virtuousness of code reuse is one of the great
apple-pie-and-motherhood verities of software development.  But many
developers entering the Unix community from a basis of experience in
other operating systems have never learned (or have unlearned) the
habit of systematic reuse.  Waste and duplicative work is rife, even
though it seems to be against the interests both of those who pay for
code and those who produce it.  Understanding why such dysfunctional
behavior persists is the first step toward changing it.
Prev
Up
Next
Combining Tools with Emacs
Home
The Tale of J. Random Newbie

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

Page not found &#8211; ibiblio
Skip to content
The Public&#039;s Library and Digital Archive
Browse
Share
Software
Linux Archive
Linux distributions
Software mirrors
Projects
terasaur
IPv6 Services
Donate
About
Awards &#038; Recognitions
People
Supporters
Open positions
Help
Contact
FAQ
Sorry, the page you requested is missing or no longer on ibiblio.
Welcome to ibiblio!
Home to one of the largest free information databases online, ibiblio.org has something for everyone. Visitors can browse through our eclectic collections catalog and contributors can host and share their unique collections with millions worldwide.
Get started: BROWSE | SHARE
What&#8217;s new?  terasaur
ibiblio has a new project, terasaur, for distributing huge files using BitTorrent.  For those who know BitTorrent, it's not just a tracker.  terasaur.org has over 2 terabytes of files seeded from ibiblio's servers.
ibiblio.org is a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science, the School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
Information Technology Services at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
About ibiblio |
Contact |
Privacy Policy |
Help

